Address client_id_scheme problems (fixes #124) (#237)
openid/OpenID4VP: openid-4-verifiable-presentations-1_0.md

## Verifier Metadata Management {#client_metadata_management}

This specification defines additional mechanisms to enable Wallets to determine whether the provided `redirect_uri` and `response_uri` parameters and public verification keys belong to a particular Client, utilizing existing mechanisms such as Dynamic Client Registration [@!RFC7591], OpenID Federation [@!OpenID.Federation], and the `client_metadata` parameter defined by this specification. Additional Verifier Metadata is retrieved using existing mechanisms or the `client_metadata` parameter.

The Wallet MUST verify that the provided `redirect_uri` or `response_uri` belongs to the Client.

If the Authorization Request is signed, the Wallet MUST authenticate the Request Object against the `client_id` contained in the Request Object. In this case, any `jwks` parameter in the `client_metadata` parameter MUST NOT be used to verify the signature of the Request Object.

> If the Verifier Metadata is not obtained from a trusted source and if the Authorization Request is unsigned, the Wallet MUST verify that the `client_id` matches the `redirect_uri` or `response_uri` parameter. Examples for trusted sources include prior registration (e.g., using [@!RFC7591]) or other out-of-band processes that allow the Wallet to retrieve trusted Verifier Metadata for a particular Client.

Reviewer: Is this method always enabled?

Author: No, it is not. We need adapt the language, also @martijnharing had a similar comment here https://github.com/openid/OpenID4VP/pull/237#discussion_r1741930279

- Pre-registered: If the Client is pre-registered, the `jwks` Client Metadata parameter provided upon registration MUST be used to verify the signature of the Request Object. The `redirect_uris` Client Metadata parameter is used to verify the `redirect_uri` or `response_uri` for that Client. Note that the Wallet determines whether the Client is pre-registered.
- X.509 certificates: If the Request Object contains an `x5c`, `x5t`, or `x5t#S256` header parameter, after validating the X.509 certificate chain, the Wallet MUST use the public key from the leaf-certificate of the X.509 certificate chain to verify the signature of the Request Object. In this case, the leaf-certificate MUST include a`dNSName` Subject Alternative Name (SAN) [RFC5280] or `uniformResourceIdentifier` SAN [RFC5280] that matches the `client_id`. If the Wallet can establish trust in the `client_id` authenticated through the certificate, e.g. because the `client_id` is contained in a list of trusted Client Identifiers, it MAY allow the Client to freely choose the `redirect_uri` or `response_uri` value. If not, the `redirect_uri` or `response_uri` value MUST match the `client_id` or FQDN of the `client_id`.

> - DID Resolution: If the `client_id` in the Request Object is a DID, the signature of the Request Object MUST be verified using a public key obtained from a `verificationMethod` property of a DID Document. Since a DID Document can include multiple public keys, the particular public key used to sign the request MUST be identified by the `kid` header parameter. To obtain the DID Document, the Wallet MUST use DID Resolution as defined by the DID method used by the Verifier. (Note that it is currently unspecified how to verify the `redirect_uri` or `response_uri` for DIDs.)

Reviewer: As above, how is a pre-registered client `did:bla:blub` distinguished from one using `did:bla:blub` as a did?

Author: A pre-registered client would not include a DID for the `kid` value.

Independently, if a wallet supports both DID and pre-registered clients, the wallet would check their preferred way to authenticate the request first. This might be DID-based or based on pre-registered client metadata.

- Verifier Attestation: If the Request Object contains a Verifier Attestation JWT, as defined in (#verifier_attestation_jwt), the Wallet MUST verify the signature of the Request Object using the public key in the `cnf` claim in the Verifier Attestation JWT. This serves as proof of possession of this key. Additionally, the `client_id` MUST equal the `sub` claim value in the Verifier Attestation JWT. The Wallet MUST validate the signature on the Verifier Attestation JWT. The `iss` claim value of the Verifier Attestation JWT MUST identify a party the Wallet trusts for issuing Verifier Attestation JWTs. If the issuer of the Verifier Attestation JWT includes a `redirect_uris` claim in the Verifier Attestation, the Wallet MUST verify that the `redirect_uri` or `response_uri` request parameter value exactly matches one of the `redirect_uris` array values.

> - OpenID Federation: If the `client_id` in the Request Object is an Entity Identifier, as defined in OpenID Federation [@!OpenID.Federation], the processing rules specified in OpenID Federation MUST be followed. When this is the case, the Entity Configuration for the Client is obtained at the path `<client_id>/.well-known/openid-federation`. Automatic Registration, as defined in OpenID Federation, MUST be used. The Authorization Request MAY also contain a `trust_chain` parameter, which can optimize the process of obtaining metadata. The `jwks` parameter of the resolved Verifier metadata obtained from the Trust Chain after applying the policies, according to OpenID Federation, MUST be used to verify the signature of the Request Object. The Wallet MUST verify that the `redirect_uri` or `response_uri` request parameter matches one of the entries of the `redirect_uris` parameter of the resolved metadata.

Reviewer: How does the Wallet identify if the client_id is an Entity Identifier?

Author: If the wallet supports OpenID Federation, the wallet would check if the client_id is a HTTPS URI and try to fetch OpenID Federation well-known.

It is a policy decision by the Wallet which method to choose to authenticate the Request Object and whether to accept unsigned Authorization Requests.

> Note: To prevent downgrade attacks, the Client can choose to enable only specific methods in the Request Object, such as the ones defined above.

Reviewer: This is completely insufficient. Why do we allow using more than one method if it is seemingly insecure to do so?

Author: Perhaps the language can be improved but a Client would not support options and set parameters in the request if they were not equally secure.

> Other specifications or ecosystem regulations MAY define rules complementing the rules defined above, but such extensions are out of scope of this specification.

Reviewer: What are the constraints for those new rules in order to safely work with the rules defined above?

Author: Good point, I would assume they should do 1 or 2 things like the other **in-band client registration** methods do:
1. authenticate the request that it was originated by the `client_id`; this is typically done by verifying the signature on the signed request; for browser API, this might be based on origin.
2. optionally check if the `redirect_uri`/`response_uri` is linked to the `client_id`; but this requirement is kind of not consistently achieved in the current version of the spec either, so I would assume it is optional;

This specification defines the following mechanisms for In-band Registration for signed requests:
* X.509 Certificates: If supported by the Wallet, the request is signed, and any of the `x5c`, `x5t`, or `x5t#S256` JWT headers are present, the Wallet MUST validate the corresponding X.509 certificate chain and use the public key from the leaf certificate to verify the signature of the signed request to authenticate the request. Additionally, the Wallet MUST check that the `client_id` in the signed request matches any X.509 Subject Alternative Name (SAN) value of the leaf certificate. If the Wallet can establish trust in the `client_id` authenticated through the leaf certificate, e.g., because the `client_id` is contained in a list of trusted Client Identifiers, it MAY allow the Client to freely choose the `redirect_uri` or `response_uri` value. If not, the `redirect_uri` or `response_uri` value MUST match the `client_id` or FQDN of the `client_id`. If either verification fails, the Wallet MUST reject the request, otherwise processing continues.

> * Verifier Attestations: If supported by the Walletm the request is signed, and the signed request contains a `jwt` JWT header that is a Verifier Attestation JWT, the Wallet MUST use the public key in the `cnf` claim in the Verifier Attestation JWT to verify the signatuer of the signed request. This serves as proof of possession of this key. Additionally, the `client_id` MUST equal the `sub` claim value in the Verifier Attestation JWT. The Wallet MUST validate the signature on the Verifier Attestation JWT. The `iss` claim value of the Verifier Attestation JWT MUST identify a party the Wallet trusts for issuing Verifier Attestation JWTs. If the issuer of the Verifier Attestation JWT includes a `redirect_uris` claim in the Verifier Attestation, the Wallet MUST verify that the `redirect_uri` or `response_uri` request parameter value exactly matches one of the `redirect_uris` array values. If either of the checks fail, the Wallet MUST reject the request, otherwise processing continues.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Verifier Attestations: If supported by the Wallet, the request is signed, and the signed request contains a `jwt` JWT header that is a Verifier Attestation JWT, the Wallet MUST use the public key in the `cnf` claim in the Verifier Attestation JWT to verify the signatuer of the signed request. This serves as proof of possession of this key. Additionally, the `client_id` MUST equal the `sub` claim value in the Verifier Attestation JWT. The Wallet MUST validate the signature on the Verifier Attestation JWT. The `iss` claim value of the Verifier Attestation JWT MUST identify a party the Wallet trusts for issuing Verifier Attestation JWTs. If the issuer of the Verifier Attestation JWT includes a `redirect_uris` claim in the Verifier Attestation, the Wallet MUST verify that the `redirect_uri` or `response_uri` request parameter value exactly matches one of the `redirect_uris` array values. If either of the checks fail, the Wallet MUST reject the request, otherwise processing continues.
```

- If the request is signed, 
  - Pre-registered Clients
  - X.509 Certificates
  - Verifier Attestations
  - DID
  - OpenID Federation
  - Other specifications or ecosystem-specific support
- If the request is unsigned,
  - Pre-registered Clients: In addition to the rules above for pre-registered Clients, the Wallet MUST check that `require_request_object_signing` is set to `false` or omitted from the pre-registered Client metadata. The request MUST be rejected if `require_request_object_signing` is `true`, otherwise processing continues.
  - Client ID matches the Redirect and/or Response URI

To prevent downgrade attacks, the Wallet MUST cyrptographically bind the JWK Thumbprint of the public key that was used to verify the signature of the signed request, to the Verifiable Presentation(s) in the response. The exact mechanism of how the JWK Thumbprint is bound to the Verifiable Presentation(s) is defined per Credential Format. For example, for SD-JWT VC, the JWK Thumbprint is prepended to the `client_id` value and included in the `aud` claim of the the Key Binding JWT, e.g., `aud=<JWK-Thumbprint>:<client_id>`.

> If the Verifier provided a signed request to the Wallet, the Verifier MUST verify the JWK Thumbprint included in the Verifiable Presentation(s) of the response corresponds to the key that signed the original request. The response MUST be rejected if verification fails, otherwise processing continues.

Reviewer 2: This section confuses me a bit, but I am easily confused. Seems a bit like "can you repeat to me what I said so I am sure you understood it".

Am a getting it right? I might be missing a smallish example of possible vectors and surfaces that we are trying to mitigate i.e. the reasoning behind this "proof of computation".

## Verifier Metadata Management {#client_metadata_management}

> This specification defines additional mechanisms to allow Wallets to determine whether the provided `redirect_uri` and `response_uri` parameters and public verification keys belong to a particular Client on top of existing mechanisms such as [@!RFC7591], OpenID Federation [@!OpenID.Federation] or `client_metadata` parameter as defined by this specification. Additional Verifier Metadata is fetched using existing mechanisms, or using the `client_metadata` parameter.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This specification defines additional mechanisms to enable Wallets to determine whether the provided `redirect_uri` and `response_uri` parameters and public verification keys belong to a particular Client, utilizing existing mechanisms such as Dynamic Client Registration [@!RFC7591], OpenID Federation [@!OpenID.Federation], and the `client_metadata` parameter defined by this specification. Additional Verifier Metadata is retrieved using existing mechanisms or the `client_metadata` parameter.
```

> The Wallet MUST verify the provided `redirect_uri` or `response_uri` belongs to the Client.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Wallet MUST verify that the provided `redirect_uri` or `response_uri` belongs to the Client.
```

If the Authorization Request is signed, the Wallet MUST authenticate the Request Object against the `client_id` contained in the Request Object. In this case, any `jwks` parameter in the `client_metadata` parameter MUST NOT be used to verify the signature of the Request Object.

> If the Verifier Metadata is not obtained from a trusted source and if the Authorization Request is unsigned, the Wallet MUST check if the `client_id` matches the `redirect_uri` or `response_uri` parameter. Note, examples for trusted sources include prior registration (e.g., using [@!RFC7591]) or other out-of-band processes that allow the Wallet to retrieve trusted Verifier Metadata for a particular Client.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If the Verifier Metadata is not obtained from a trusted source and if the Authorization Request is unsigned, the Wallet MUST verify that the `client_id` matches the `redirect_uri` or `response_uri` parameter. Examples for trusted sources include prior registration (e.g., using [@!RFC7591]) or other out-of-band processes that allow the Wallet to retrieve trusted Verifier Metadata for a particular Client.
```

> If the Verifier Metadata is not obtained from a trusted source and if the Authorization Request is unsigned, the Wallet MUST verify that the `client_id` matches the `redirect_uri` or `response_uri` parameter. Examples for trusted sources include prior registration (e.g., using [@!RFC7591]) or other out-of-band processes that allow the Wallet to retrieve trusted Verifier Metadata for a particular Client.

Reviewer 4: It should be stated that this requirement only applies if the client_id is present.

Reviewer 5: I'm not convinced this matters, isn't client_id mandatory in all cases where redirect_uri or response_uri can be used? (i.e. I think you can only omit client_id in unsigned browser API requests, where redirect_uri and response_uri aren't permitted to be used).

> The following is a list of methods defined by this specification that MAY be used by the Wallet to authenticate the Request Object and to verify that the `redirect_uri` or `response_uri` belongs to the Client:

Reviewer 4: It states that the following mechanisms MAY be used, but the mechanisms themselves contain MUST. What does this mean exactly, some options:

1. It's optional to use these mechanisms even when the conditions are applicable, but if the mechanism is used by the wallet, the requirements have to be followed.
2. When the conditions are applicable the mechanism MUST be used, otherwise an error must be given.
3. When the conditions are applicable the mechanism MUST be used, otherwise the client is considered not authenticated, with the consequences being out of scope.

Something else?

Author: The PR aims to allow for Option 1. I agree that the combination of MAY and MUST is not clear.

Reviewer: What happens if the request has contradicting properties, e.g., fulfills the rules in X.509 and Federation at the same time?

> - Pre-registered: If the Client is pre-registered, the `jwks` Client Metadata parameter provided upon registration MUST be used to verify the signature of the Request Object. The `redirect_uris` Client Metadata parameter is used to verify the `redirect_uri` or `response_uri` for that Client. Note that the Wallet determines whether the Client is pre-registered.

Reviewer 2: > Note that the Wallet determines whether the Client is pre-registered.

out of curiosity, do we need this note, isn't it implied?

Author: It is implied but I remember we had a discussion about this topic, so I kept that language for clarity.

Reviewer: If enabled together, how does the wallet distinguish between a pre-registered client `https://example.com` from one authenticating with an x509 cert for that URL?

Author: We can add that wallets and wallet providers MUST implement the OAuth Security BCP that suggests to use random client IDs where there is no clash possible.

> - X.509 certificates: If the Request Object contains an `x5c`, `x5t`, or `x5t#S256` header parameter, after validating the X.509 certificate chain, the Wallet MUST use the public key from the leaf-certificate of the X.509 certificate chain to verify the signature of the Request Object. In this case, the leaf-certificate MUST include a`dNSName` Subject Alternative Name (SAN) [RFC5280] or `uniformResourceIdentifier` SAN [RFC5280] that matches the `client_id`. If the Wallet can establish trust in the `client_id` authenticated through the certificate, e.g. because the `client_id` is contained in a list of trusted Client Identifiers, it MAY allow the Client to freely choose the `redirect_uri` or `response_uri` value. If not, the `redirect_uri` or `response_uri` value MUST match the `client_id` or FQDN of the `client_id`.

Reviewer 4: X.509 certificates should not be required to contain a SAN. It's possible to authenticate a client, without that authentication being bound to a SAN. (as an example, this is also what is used for in-person relying party authentication)

In case of the browser api, the requirement that the client_id must match the response_uri is not applicable and this should be stated as such.

Author: I agree with this. It is questionable what the value add of SAN is in this context if the root is trusted.

Author: I believe `client_id` must match `response_uri` should not be a requirement. It might be useful though that `redirect_uri`/`response_uri` is included in the SAN in some way but it shouldn't be required. Since Browser API doesn't have `redirect_uri`/`response_uri`, this wouldn't apply to browser API.

> - DID Resolution: If the `client_id` in the Request Object is a DID, the signature of the Request Object MUST be verified using a public key obtained from a `verificationMethod` property of a DID Document. Since a DID Document can include multiple public keys, the particular public key used to sign the request MUST be identified by the `kid` header parameter. To obtain the DID Document, the Wallet MUST use DID Resolution as defined by the DID method used by the Verifier. (Note that it is currently unspecified how to verify the `redirect_uri` or `response_uri` for DIDs.)

Reviewer 2: This section in a way relied on the non-normative example to provide more details about how the key from the did is liked to the kid in the jwt. "In the wild" I saw people using the JWT kid from the `verificationMethod.publicKeyJwk` in the JWT `kid`. For this reason I think it at least requires a word or two extra.

```suggestion
- DID Resolution: If the `client_id` in the Request Object is a DID, the signature of the Request Object MUST be verified using a public key obtained from a `verificationMethod` property of a DID Document. Since a DID Document can include multiple public keys, the particular public key used to sign the request MUST be identified by the `kid` header referring to a `verificationMethod.id` DID URL. To obtain the DID Document, the Wallet MUST use DID Resolution as defined by the DID method used by the Verifier. (Note that it is currently unspecified how to verify the `redirect_uri` or `response_uri` for DIDs.)
```

> - DID Resolution: If the `client_id` in the Request Object is a DID, the signature of the Request Object MUST be verified using a public key obtained from a `verificationMethod` property of a DID Document. Since a DID Document can include multiple public keys, the particular public key used to sign the request MUST be identified by the `kid` header parameter. To obtain the DID Document, the Wallet MUST use DID Resolution as defined by the DID method used by the Verifier. (Note that it is currently unspecified how to verify the `redirect_uri` or `response_uri` for DIDs.)

Reviewer 2: > (Note that it is currently unspecified how to verify the `redirect_uri` or `response_uri` for DIDs.)

Should we mention https://identity.foundation/specs/did-configuration/ and linked-domains (linkage credentials) here as a possible mechanism?

Reviewer 2: I think it is not needed in certain cases for sure, I just saw this spec used and mentioned when people needed it in their specific use cases and I wondered do we also want/need to mention it as a hint as we did in the VCI spec.

I think in the end will be a detail of a rule set of a given ecosystem, and this might not even matter as people will do what makes sense to them.

> - Verifier Attestation: If the Request Object contains a Verifier Attestation JWT as defined in (#verifier_attestation_jwt), the Wallet MUST verify the signature of the Request Object using the public key in the `cnf` claim in the Verifier Attestation JWT. This serves as proof of possesion of this key. Additionally, the `client_id` MUST equal the `sub` claim value in the Verifier Attestation JWT. The Wallet MUST validate the signature on the Verifier Attestation JWT. The `iss` claim value of the Verifier Attestation JWT MUST identify a party the Wallet trusts for issuing Verifier Attestation JWTs. If the issuer of the Verifier Attestation JWT includes a `redirect_uris` claim in the Verifier Attestation, the Wallet MUST ensure the `redirect_uri` or `response_uri` request parameter value exactly matches one of the `redirect_uris` array values.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Verifier Attestation: If the Request Object contains a Verifier Attestation JWT, as defined in (#verifier_attestation_jwt), the Wallet MUST verify the signature of the Request Object using the public key in the `cnf` claim in the Verifier Attestation JWT. This serves as proof of possession of this key. Additionally, the `client_id` MUST equal the `sub` claim value in the Verifier Attestation JWT. The Wallet MUST validate the signature on the Verifier Attestation JWT. The `iss` claim value of the Verifier Attestation JWT MUST identify a party the Wallet trusts for issuing Verifier Attestation JWTs. If the issuer of the Verifier Attestation JWT includes a `redirect_uris` claim in the Verifier Attestation, the Wallet MUST verify that the `redirect_uri` or `response_uri` request parameter value exactly matches one of the `redirect_uris` array values.
```

> - OpenID Federation: If the `client_id` in the Request Object is an Entity Identifier as defined in OpenID Federation [@!OpenID.Federation], the processing rules specified in OpenID Federation MUST be followed. When this is the case, the Entity Configuration for the Client is obtained at the path `<client_id>/.well-known/openid-federation`. Automatic Registration as defined in OpenID Federation MUST be used. The Authorization Request MAY also contain a `trust_chain` parameter, which can optimize the process of obtaining metadata. The `jwks` parameter of the resolved Verifier metadata obtained from the Trust Chain after applying the policies, according to OpenID Federation, MUST be used to verify the signature of the Request Object. The Wallet MUST verify the `redirect_uri` or `response_uri` request parameter matches one of the entries of the `redirect_uris` parameter of the resolved metadata.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- OpenID Federation: If the `client_id` in the Request Object is an Entity Identifier, as defined in OpenID Federation [@!OpenID.Federation], the processing rules specified in OpenID Federation MUST be followed. When this is the case, the Entity Configuration for the Client is obtained at the path `<client_id>/.well-known/openid-federation`. Automatic Registration, as defined in OpenID Federation, MUST be used. The Authorization Request MAY also contain a `trust_chain` parameter, which can optimize the process of obtaining metadata. The `jwks` parameter of the resolved Verifier metadata obtained from the Trust Chain after applying the policies, according to OpenID Federation, MUST be used to verify the signature of the Request Object. The Wallet MUST verify that the `redirect_uri` or `response_uri` request parameter matches one of the entries of the `redirect_uris` parameter of the resolved metadata.
```

> It is a Wallet-policy decision which method to choose to authenticate the Request Object and whether to accept unsigned Authorization Requests.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It is a policy decision by the Wallet which method to choose to authenticate the Request Object and whether to accept unsigned Authorization Requests.
```

> Note: To prevent downgrade attacks, a Client can choose to include certain parameters in the Request Object or not.

Reviewer 3: This is not actionable as written.  I suggest including an example, so that it reads:
> To prevent downgrade attacks, the Client can choose to include parameters such as X, Y, or Z in the Request Object.

Author: What about:

```suggestion
Note: To prevent downgrade attacks, the Client can choose to enable only specific methods in the Request Object, such as the ones defined above.
```
